(tense music)
(dramatic orchestral music)
(slow orchestral music)
(loud explosions)
(airplane engine screams)
- [Narrator] When the Japanese
attacked Pearl Harbor,
they did so intending to
smash in one single blow
America's resolution and
its inability to retaliate.
They failed miserably on both counts.
The Japanese sank or badly damaged
seven antiquated American battleships,
but since they were lost in harbor
many of their crews were saved.
And all but two of the
ships were salvaged.
The raid also left most of Pearl Harbor's
shore installations intact.
Most important of all,
the violation of United States territory
united the nation behind the
declaration of war on Japan.
Moreover, the loss of the battleships
forced the United States Navy
to use its aircraft carriers
as the core of a more
up-to-date Pacific fleet.
- Yesterday,
December 7, 1941,
a date which will live in infamy.
- [Narrator] The 1927 vintage
Lexington and Saratoga
and the much more modern Enterprise
were out of port during the raid,
and were therefore untouched.
By 1942, they were joined by
the Enterprise's sister ship,
Yorktown, and the newly completed Hornet.
These carriers were well-fitted
to take the offensive,
for they carried a large number
of effective fighters and dive bombers.
The Commander in Chief of the
Central Pacific Fleet in 1942
was Admiral Chester William Nimitz.
Within weeks of his appointment
this great leader transformed
the moral of his men,
infecting them all with his own confidence
in a final Allied victory.
(airplane engine putters)
Following his appointment,
Nimitz decided to mount
a series of raids on Japanese-held
islands in the Pacific.
The main reason for these raids,
apart from harassing the Japanese,
was to maintain the morale of his crews
and give them valuable
operational experience.
On separate occasions, his
fleet attacked Japanese bases
in the Marshall and Gilbert Islands.
Then in March he took his fleet
to attack Wake and Marcus Islands.
These strikes were by no means small,
and the damage inflicted on old targets
throughout the first few months
of 1942 was considerable.
(aircraft engine putters)
One nightmare of prewar
Japanese military strategists
had been the possibility
of an attack by aircraft
from United States carriers
on Japan's own islands.
Their worst fears were fulfilled when,
on the 18th of April 1942
16 United States Army B-25
Mitchells struck Tokyo.
They were led by Lieutenant
Colonel James Doolittle.
(aircraft engine putters)
What was even more surprising
was the fact that these 12-ton aircraft,
normally land-based,
took off from the decks
of the United States carrier Hornet.
(aircraft engine putters)
The very heart of Tokyo was bombed.
And although the damage was slight,
the effect on the Japanese
nation was enormous.
(ominous music)
The horror of the Japanese people
led to the commander
of the Japanese fleet,
Admiral Yamamoto, being granted permission
for his grand plan.
A final showdown between the United States
and Japanese fleets.
What Yamamoto did not include
in his grand plan, however,
was the fact that these plans
would soon be known by his enemies.
By the end of April, American
intelligence were able
to decrypt 85% of Japanese signals.
This alone would give the Americans
an incalculable advantage in the Pacific.
Intelligence had been coming in
indicating a major
offensive was being planned
in the Southwest Pacific.
The United States decoders
confirmed that Port Moresby
was the target along
with the secondary target
on the Solomon Islands.
From these two strongholds,
the Japanese could dominate,
if not actually invade,
Northern Australia.
The Japanese plan was to isolate Australia
from the United States of America,
first by seizing Port Moresby
and establishing a seaplane
base at the tiny island
of Tulaghi in the Solomons.
Then they would take key
points in New Caledonia,
the New Hebrides, and Fiji.
To mount this offensive,
the Japanese had assembled
an invasion force
which included a formidable striking force
of six modern destroyers,
two heavy cruisers,
and the large fleet carriers
Shokaku and Zuikaku.
(waves crashing)
These carriers held 133 aircraft.
The main Port Moresby invasion force
was to depart from Rabaul,
but the striking force was to come from
Truk in the Caroline Islands,
about 1600 kilometers
northeast of New Guinea.
The Americans acted quickly
and the hunt was on.
Admiral Nimitz added a
three-part naval force
to the Coral Sea.
In tactical command of the whole force
was Rear Admiral Frank J.
Fletcher on the carrier Yorktown,
which was to lead Task Force 17.
(ominous music)
On the 1st of May, this force
linked up with Task Force 11
commanded by Rear Admiral
Fitch on the carrier Lexington
just south of the Solomon Islands.
The two carriers, carrying 141 aircraft
were escorted by five
cruisers and 11 destroyers.
This force was joined later in the day
by an Australian-American force
of cruisers and destroyers
under Rear Admiral John Crace.
(ominous music)
On the 3rd of May the Japanese
seized the tiny island
of Tulaghi without meeting any opposition.
The next day they were struck
by aircraft from the Yorktown.
(aircraft engines roar)
(rapid gunfire)
This American strike sunk a destroyer
and several minor Japanese ships
that cost the Americans
the advantage of surprise.
The Japanese now knew that at least
one United States carrier
was in the vicinity.
Throughout the 5th and 6th of May,
the Japanese and American spotter planes
sought each other out, but in vain.
(ominous music)
It was on the 7th of
May that the two enemies
eventually made contact, but
both sides suffered equally
from errors and accidents.
Just after 0700 hours, a
Japanese search plane spotted
what he took to be an
enemy carrier and a cruiser
southwest of Guadalcanal.
Rear Admiral Hara, in immediate command
of the Japanese carriers
Shokaku and Zuikaku,
launched a full-scale attack.
51 dive bombers escorted
by 18 Zero fighters
took off for the offensive.
The two ships spotted, however,
were in fact the tanker USS Neosho
and an escorting destroyer.
They were easy targets.
However, whilst this attack was underway,
news reached Rear Admiral Hara
that the real United States force
had been spotted farther
away to the northwest.
All he could do was wait anxiously
for his aircraft to return.
But it wasn't only the
Japanese that made a mistake.
At 0815 hours, a United
States reconnaissance plane
reported seeing two Japanese carriers
and four large cruisers
just north of Misima Island
near the tip of New Guinea.
Admiral Fletcher on the Yorktown,
convinced that he had found
the main Japanese force,
launched his full-scale attack.
93 aircraft took off from the carriers
Yorktown and Lexington.
In fact, the reconnaissance
pilot had only spotted one
of the Japanese support groups,
two cruisers and two destroyers.
The day was saved by the sharp eyes
of Lieutenant Colonel Hamilton,
Commander of the Lexington's
dive bomber squadron.
While on the way to
attack the support group,
Hamilton drifted off course to the east.
He spotted a much more important force:
A covering force for the
Port Moresby invasion,
commanded by Rear Admiral Aritomo Goto
from the carrier Shoho.
The American planes were redirected.
(gunfire pops)
At first, the highly-maneuverable
Japanese carrier
managed to dodge the American attacks.
The Shoho was eventually
overwhelmed and sunk.
(aircraft engine roars)
(rapid gunfire)
Meanwhile, Fletcher had directed
the Australian-American force
under Rear Admiral Crace
against the Port Moresby invasion.
Crace's force was attacked
by land-based Japanese
aircraft from Rabaul
and later by United States
B-26's from Australia,
mistaking them for Japanese.
Luckily, neither attack was successful.
Another amazing mistake on
the part of the Japanese
took place on the 7th of May.
27 Japanese aircraft
out looking for the United
states fleet spotted Yorktown.
They mistook it for a Japanese carrier
and attempted to land.
10 were shot down.
(aircraft engine roars)
(loud splash and explosion)
(aircraft squeals)
(aircraft engine roars)
(rapid gunfire)
(waves crashing)
News of the loss of Shoho and the presence
of the United States Australian
force off Port Moresby
persuaded the commander
of the invasion force,
Vice Admiral Inoue, to delay
the attack on Port Moresby.
First he would deal with the
United States carrier fleet.
(waves crashing)
(ominous music)
Early on the morning of the 8th,
the two carrier forces
finally located each other.
After the loss of Shoho,
both sides now had two carriers each,
but the Japanese only had
95 operational aircraft
against the Americans' 118.
Shortly after 0900 hours,
both sides aircraft were launched
and the Battle of the Coral Sea commenced.
(eerie electronic music)
(aircraft engine roars)
The Japanese attack
inflicted significant damage
on both the Yorktown and Lexington.
Yorktown managed with clever maneuvering
to avoid the Japanese torpedoes,
but bombs exploding in the water nearby
badly damaged her below the water line.
Another bomb went down through four decks,
where, consequently, it exploded,
killing 37 of their crew and wounding 33.
(aircraft engine roars)
(loud gunfire)
The Lexington, bigger
and less maneuverable
than the Yorktown, was
hit by two torpedoes,
as well as several bombs
and was listing badly on the port side.
Meanwhile, United States pilots
were launching an assault
on the Japanese carriers
Shokaku and Zuikaku.
(aircraft engine roars)
Zuikaku, the flagship,
was hidden by a rainstorm,
so the full weight of the American attack
fell on her sister ship, Shokaku.
The few defending Zeroes
were able to force
the first wave of American devastators
to launch their torpedoes too far away
to make any hits.
But the second wave of
dauntless dive bombers
that followed, were much more successful.
One dauntless pilot,
Lieutenant John Powers
had vowed to sink an
enemy carrier unaided.
During the attack on Shokaku he swooped
in a daring low level attack releasing his
bomb a mere 19 meters
above the carriers deck.
In the resulting explosion, Powers crashed
to his death in the sea.
But the damage to the flight deck,
caused as a result of
his bomb was so severe
that the carriers aircraft were no longer
able to take off or land.
Further bombs completed the job.
Shokaku had to withdraw from the battle.
No longer with air cover
Inoue had to call off the
whole operation and
withdraw his invasion force.
The Battle of the Coral Sea was thus
a strategic success for the Americans.
But it was marred by a serious
and unexpected incident.
Two hours after the last plane
had retired from the battle,
the Lexington erupted in a huge explosion.
(loud explosion)
Ironically this was nothing
to do with the attack.
But was caused by a mere
spark from a generator
which had accidentally been left running.
The fires were fed by petrol fuel
and vapor from the ruptured tanks.
It took until the next
day to put the fire out.
But by then the damage was so severe that
she had to be abandoned.
2,735 crew were saved.
But 216 had died in the fire.
She was sunk by a torpedo fired
from an American destroyer.
The Americans had lost
one carrier, a tanker,
and a destroyer.
While the Japanese lost one
carrier, and one destroyer.
But only 564 United States sailors
and airmen had been killed compared to
Japanese losses of 1,074 men.
Japan also lost 77 aircraft
compared to America's 66.
The battle turned back the
Japanese threat to Port Moresby
and consequently to Australia.
The Coral Sea had been
the first sea battle ever
where two fleets had
engaged on the high seas
without being in sight of one another
and relying entirely on
aircraft to strike the enemy.
The Americans were quick to master this
new type of Naval warfare and
were ready to use it again
at a later date.
That date was not far away.
Japan's admirals were already
planning another battle
where they hoped to
cripple the United States
Pacific fleet once and for all.
By attacking Midway Atoll,
at the far western end of the
Hawaiian chain of islands,
the Japanese hoped to
lure the United States
Pacific fleet into the
open sea and destroy it.
(ominous music)
On the 20th of May 1942
allied listening stations
around the Pacific
picked up a lengthy radio signal in code
from Admiral Yamamoto to his fleet.
The message was relayed
to the United States
Combat Intelligence Unit at
Pearl Harbor and deciphered.
It was revealed that the Japanese Navy
was about to mount a powerful attack
on the mid-Pacific Atoll of Midway with a
secondary diversionary attack
on the Aleutians further north.
Dutch Harbor in the Aleutians will
be hit on the 3rd of June
and Midway the next day.
Operation MI, the Midway strike,
had all the hallmarks
of Japanese planning.
It was over complex.
Made unjustified assumptions about
how the enemy would react and
fail to concentrate force.
Even so, the plan might well have worked
had the Americans not
discovered it's secrets.
The very choice of Midway was flawed.
One of Yamamoto's carrier
captains called it
an impossible and pointless operation.
But while the Japanese
leaders were debating
where to strike, their minds
had been made up for them.
The Doolittle Raid on
Tokyo the previous April
had put their sacred emperor in danger.
The mortified generals and admirals
knew then that every
gap in Japan's defensive
perimeter must be plugged.
Yamamoto's plan was thus.
While part of his fleet
were attacking Midway,
the rest of the fleet would create
a diversionary attack on the Aleutians.
If Midway fell, this would pose a serious
threat to Pearl Harbor.
Therefore, Admiral Nimitz would have
to attempt to retake Midway.
Waiting for him would be
the Japanese Pacific fleet.
Supported by land base aircraft operating
from the newly captured island.
Yamamoto would spring the trap
and achieve what had
eluded him at Pearl Harbor.
The destruction of American
Naval power in the Pacific.
Yamamoto believed that
following the destruction
of Nimitz fleet, the
western seaboard of the
United States of America
would be at the mercy of the Japanese.
President Roosevelt would
therefore have no alternative
other than to sue for peace.
At least that is how the Japanese saw it.
Yamamoto committed almost
the entire Japanese fleet
to his plan.
160 warships including
eight aircraft carriers
with more than 400 carrier based aircraft.
The force was separated
into five battle groups.
At the head of the force was the
first carrier striking force.
With four carriers and 225 dive bombers.
These were to bombard Midway
before the invasion force with 5,000 men
were to be landed from 12 transport ships.
The invasion force was
protected by two support groups.
Each 80 kilometers away.
950 kilometers behind this force
would be the main Japanese battle fleet
with seven battleships.
These were to finish off the United States
Pacific fleet after the carriers had
inflicted the decisive damage.
Knowing that the odds were
stacked heavily against him,
Nimitz staked everything on his faith
and the aircraft carrier and it's ability
to strike from long range.
He decided that his
much slower battleships
would be a liability and ordered them
to stay on the United States west coast.
Nimitz divided his force
into two battle groups.
Taskforce 16 with the carriers
US Hornet and Enterprise.
And Taskforce 17 with
the carrier Yorktown.
(ominous music)
On the 28th of May,
Taskforce 16 left Pearl Harbor.
Meanwhile Taskforce 17 had been delayed.
Having just returned from
the Battle in the Coral Sea
Yorktown was badly damaged.
The Pearl Harbor crews told Nimitz
that the repairs would take
three weeks to complete.
Nimitz however asked for the Yorktown's
repairs to be completed in 48 hours.
Working around the clock,
the job was completed.
And on the 30th of May under the command
of Admiral Frank Fletcher,
the Yorktown left port.
Once at sea, Fletcher was to take tactical
command of the United States force.
"You will be governed by the principle
"of calculated risk" Nimitz commanded.
Warned by intelligence
they were in position
well before the Japanese submarines
had established a cordon west of Hawaii
to watch for the United States fleet.
(ominous music)
Midway Island.
A small outpost midway between the
US state of Hawaii and Japan
and the centre gate to Pearl Harbor.
The island was on a state of alert.
They know that somewhere beyond the clouds
and the horizon lay the Japanese fleet.
Intelligence had reported that the attack
on the island was due the next day.
The Midway garrison had been reinforced.
And during the previous night,
flying fortresses had landed at Midway.
By 0700 hours they were on
the runway being refueled.
Bombs were loaded and their
guns were fully armed.
Once the enemy had been sighted,
they would be in place and ready
to mount an air raid attack on the fleet.
On dawn patrol, Ensign Jack Reid,
flying a Catalina flying boat from Midway
was scouring the skies looking for signs
of the enemy fleet.
At 0900 hours he spotted
the transport ships
and escort cruisers of the
Japanese invasion force.
A signal was relayed to
Fletcher aboard the Yorktown.
This target was not his prime concern.
He wanted the Japanese
carrier striking force.
Instead he ordered an attack to be mounted
by the Midway based
B-17 Flying Fortresses.
As the bombers lumbered
down the air strip,
news came in to Fletcher that the Japanese
diversionary attack was already underway.
(ominous music)
(faint explosion)
In the early hours of the morning,
the Japanese had attacked
the Aleutian islands.
Torpedo bombers and Zero Fighters
from the carrier Ryujo attacked the
United States base at Dutch
Harbor on Unalaska Island.
They inflicted damage on the oil dumps,
barracks, hospital, and a church.
However, inexperienced pilots from the
other carrier in the
force, Junyo got lost.
The American flying boats
had spotted the Japanese
but they were too far away
from the United States
ships or shore based aircraft
to make effective attacks.
Meanwhile, Nimitz, not
deceived by this diversion,
refused to divert large forces north
away from Midway.
(ominous music)
The 4th of June
and the United States main prey,
the Japanese carrier striking force
under Admiral Nagumo was
zigzagging through dense fog.
Completely oblivious to Fletcher's fleet
lying in wait for them.
In the early hours of the morning
they reached calm and clear conditions.
At 0430 hours, Nagumo
launched his first strike
108 aircraft took off from
the carriers to attack Midway.
(loud gunshots)
They were immediately
spotted on Midway's radar.
The Zero Fighters appeared
from behind the clouds
and the islands defenses
went into action immediately.
(loud gunshots)
Midway's fighters went
up to engage the enemy.
(loud buzzing)
(loud gunshots)
(loud explosion)
(engines buzzing)
(loud explosions)
(loud gunfire)
Considerable damage was inflicted on the
airfield buildings and garrison.
But the air strip remained intact.
A few transport aircraft were damaged,
but most of the fighter
and bomber aircraft
were in the air and out of
the way during the attack.
As the fires burned over Midway,
the extent of the damage was surveyed.
(crackling)
Nagumo was now in a quandary.
His first attack had not knocked out
the airfield as planned.
It was still operational.
A second air attack was needed.
He had been following Yamamoto's orders
and had held back his best air crews,
their planes being armed
with anti-ship weapons
in case the United
States fleet had arrived
sooner than expected.
Yet his search planes had
spotted no United States ships.
And he needed to finish the job at Midway.
Before he had made a decision however,
the Americans had made
up his mind for him.
The bombers from Midway
had arrived overhead
and were attacking his ships.
Although they did no damage,
they did change the course of the battle.
The Japanese commander ordered his
second wave torpedo bombers to be
rearmed with bombs for
another attack on Midway.
At 0728 hours, 15 minutes
after the commander
had ordered his aircraft below,
one of Nagumo's search planes spotted
10 United States warships
some 335 kilometers northeast
of the Japanese carriers.
Ironically, this plane had taken off
30 minutes late that morning.
Had it taken off on time,
it would have spotted the
Americans 30 minutes earlier
and got the news back before the torpedo
bombers had been sent below.
If this had been the case,
Nagumo would almost have certainly sent
his aircraft against
the United States fleet
and the course of the battle,
and of the entire war in the Pacific
might have been very different.
As it was, Nagumo was
yet again in a quandary.
Should he turn his attention
to the United States ships,
or concentrate on Midway?
He halted the rearming.
But there was one more question for the
Japanese commander to worry about.
Did the United States
force include carriers?
His worst fears were realized when
at 0820 hours a scout
reported that the enemy
was accompanied by what
looked to be a carrier.
The news could not have reached
Nagumo at a worse moment.
His first wave was just arriving back
from the attack on Midway
and had to land to refuel.
What bombers he did have available
would have to fly without fighter escort
and were only armed with
bombs and not torpedoes.
By 0918 hours, the Japanese flight decks
were full of aircraft.
Some now rearmed, others being refueled.
The carriers were like floating bombs.
Also unbeknown to Nagumo,
Fletcher had launched his aircraft
and was about to attack at any moment.
(loud buzzing)
News that airborne Catalinas had spotted
the Japanese carrier fleet had reached
Fletcher that morning at 0534 hours.
Fletcher had ordered the Hornet
and the Enterprise ahead
to attack while the
Yorktown waited to retrieve
the spotter planes.
At 0700 hours the Hornet
and Enterprise still
a long way off from the Japanese carriers
launched their aircraft.
152 of them.
They were aware that the Japanese were
landing aircraft after
the attack on Midway.
But they were taking a big gamble
launching from such a
dangerous long range.
Yet these men were to make probably
the most decisive naval
airstrike in history.
However, what these pilots didn't know
was that Nagumo had changed course when he
decided to reload his aircraft.
As a result, the first aircraft
had difficulty locating their prey.
(ominous music)
At 0928 hours the first United States
torpedo planes from the Hornet appeared
over the Japanese fleet
diving in to attack.
The Japanese launched their Zeroes.
Attempting to drive the
bombers away from the ships.
And there was a fierce and
bloody fight in the skies.
(loud buzzing)
(loud explosion)
(faint gunfire)
(loud screeching)
(loud gunfire)
By 0945 hours, another
wave of torpedo bombers
arrived from the Enterprise.
Followed by another wave
from the Yorktown at 10:15.
(loud screeching)
(loud gunfire)
The American losses were high.
The Zeroes and anti-aircraft
fired from the ships
were taking their toll.
Only four out of the
Enterprises first wave
made it back to the carrier.
The Hornet and Yorktown
crew suffered equally.
(loud rumbling)
Those that did make it back,
had the problems of
landing a battle damaged
aircraft on a rolling carrier deck.
This pilot wasn't so lucky.
Others landed in flames.
(ominous music)
Amazingly, this pilot survived.
Lieutenant Commander McClusky scanned the
sparkling blue Pacific
northeast of Midway island.
He was leading 33 dive
bombers from the Enterprise
and was lost.
He needed to make a decision.
Where he had expected to find
the enemy there was nothing.
And his planes would soon have to
turn back for lack of fuel.
But McClusky had a hunch.
He decided to continue his
search a little further west
and the gamble paid off.
Nimitz later described this as
the most important decision of the battle.
A few minutes later,
McClusky spotted the wake
of an enemy destroyer and followed it.
Just after 1000 hours he
found the Japanese carriers.
The first waves of bombers which had
attacked previously had
suffered disastrously.
Most of them had been
shot down by the Zeroes.
But this first attack had let McClusky's
dive bombers come in unnoticed.
Joined by a further 17 dive
bombers from the Yorktown,
McClusky could not have
arrived at a better moment.
The decks of the Japanese carriers were
crammed with nearly 100 aircraft
as they prepared for their own strike
against the United States carriers.
All of them were loaded with explosives
and high octane fuel.
The tiniest spark would turn them
into floating infernos.
As the Japanese carriers
were turning into the wind
to launch their aircraft, 50 United States
dive bombers were
hurdling in from the sky.
(loud gunfire)
(loud screeching)
The first hits turned the carriers
Akagi, Kaga, and Soryu
into exploding torches.
One Japanese sailor later recalled
"The terrifying scream of the dive bomber
"reached me first,
followed by the crashing
"explosion of a direct hit.
"There was a blinding flash
and then a second explosion
"much louder than the first."
(loud gunfire)
(loud screeching)
(loud buzzing)
Within minutes, most of the
Japanese first air fleet
had been wiped out.
The 4th carrier, Hiryu was saved
and tried a desperate counter attack.
At 1200 hours she launched
her aircraft against the Yorktown.
(loud gunfire)
(loud buzzing)
During this stage of the battle,
despite desperate maneuvering,
the Yorktown took several direct hits.
(loud gunfire)
You can see here how a large carrier
with her powerful engines can turn
dramatically in full rudder.
Here you can see the
effects of a bomb exploding
close to the Yorktown.
Notice how the aircraft
bounces on the flight deck.
(ominous music)
The Yorktown fought hard for survival
against the Japanese bombers.
But it was in vain.
(ominous music)
(slow paced music)
By 1440 hours, following
another direct hit
from a torpedo, the Yorktown
was so badly crippled
that Fletcher had no other alternative
than to abandon her.
He handed command over
to Admiral Spruance,
commander of Taskforce 16.
At 1700 hours, Spruance
launched his aircraft
from the Hornet and Enterprise.
Their mission?
To attack the Hiryu.
(loud buzzing)
(suspenseful music)
The attack took the Japanese by surprise.
Once again the aircraft were on deck
as they were preparing for a twilight raid
on the remaining American carriers.
(eerie music)
(loud gunfire)
Four direct hits set her decks ablaze.
The Hiryu was crippled beyond repair.
During the night of the 4th of June,
whilst the United Stated crews onboard
Hornet and Enterprise prepared their
aircraft for the next days battle,
the Japanese carriers Soryu and Kaga
sank to the bottom of the ocean.
(ominous music)
As dawn broke on the
morning of the 5th of June,
news came back to the United States fleet
that the Hiryu, still burning like a torch
was sinking fast.
Shortly afterwards, reports came back
that the remaining carrier, Akagi,
had followed the same
fate as the other three.
Four of Japan's finest carriers had gone.
(ominous music)
On the 6th of June,
Yamamoto gave the order
for a general withdrawal.
But not before United States planes
attacked two of the Japanese cruisers.
Sinking one of them and
badly damaging the other.
(loud buzzing)
(loud gunfire)
(ominous music)
On the morning of the 7th of June,
damage control crews boarded the Yorktown
in an effort to save her.
However, a short while
later she was torpedoed
by a Japanese submarine
and was sent to the bottom.
(loud explosions)
Also on this day, the Japanese landed
on the islands of Attu and
Kiska in the Aleutians.
Capturing a little more
than a weather station.
(loud gunfire)
These two western most
islands in the Aleutian chain
were so peripheral that they were of
little consequence to the Americans.
In fact, so much so they took four days
before the Americans actually
knew they were there.
And even then, made no
immediate effort to regain them.
Whilst both sides claim
the previous battle
in the Coral Sea a Victory,
there could be no doubt about Midway.
The United States had
destroyed the Japanese
main striking force of four
carriers and a heavy cruiser,
322 aircraft, and almost
5,000 men and officers.
The United States Pacific fleet,
far from being destroyed
as Yamamoto had promised,
had won the remarkable victory.
And what's more, as often
happens in military history,
they won a victory against an enemy
far superior in terms of numbers.
Whilst the Japanese effort was compromised
by poor strategy, tactical
error, and misfortune,
the Americans were aided
by excellent intelligence,
naval air organization, tactical command,
and most important of
all, a great deal of luck.
Despite the loss of one
carrier, 137 aircraft,
and 307 men, the Americans had
turned the tide of war in the Pacific.
No longer would Japan be in position
to risk a major fleet versus fleet action
and were now on the defensive.
By the time Japan had rebuilt it's fleet,
American power had become fully mobilized
into the unstoppable might
that Yamamoto had so feared.
(dramatic music)
(upbeat music)